There are three architectural parameters that
characterize a virtual memory system and hence
the architecture of the MMU.
P is the number of address bits used for the
page offset in both virtual and physical addresses.
V is the number of address bits used for the
virtual page number.
And M is the number of address bits used for
the physical page number.
All the other parameters, listed on the right,
are derived from these three parameters.
As mentioned earlier, the typical page size
is between 4KB and 16KB, the sweet spot in
the tradeoff between the downside of using
physical memory to hold unwanted locations
and the upside of reading as much as possible
from secondary storage so as to amortize the
high cost of accessing the initial word over
as many words as possible.
The size of the virtual address is determined
by the ISA.
We're now making the transition from 32-bit
architectures, which support a 4 gigabyte
virtual address space, to 64-bit architectures,
which support a 16 exabyte virtual address
space.
"Exa" is the SI prefix for 10^18 - a 64-bit
address can access a *lot* of memory!
The limitations of a small virtual address
have been the main cause for the extinction
of many ISAs.
Of course, each generation of engineers thinks
that the transition they make will be the
final one!
I can remember when we all thought that 32
bits was an unimaginably large address.
Back then we're buying memory by the megabyte
and only in our fantasies did we think one
could have a system with several thousand
megabytes.
Today's CPU architects are feeling pretty
smug about 64 bits - we'll see how they feel
in a couple of decades!
The size of physical addresses is currently
between 30 bits (for embedded processors with
modest memory needs) and 40+ bits (for servers
that handle large data sets).
Since CPU implementations are expected to
change every couple of years, the choice of
physical memory size can be adjusted to match
current technologies.
Since programmers use virtual addresses, they're
insulated from this implementation choice.
The MMU ensures that existing software will
continue to function correctly with different
sizes of physical memory.
The programmer may notice differences in performance,
but not in basic functionality.
For example, suppose our system supported
a 32-bit virtual address, a 30-bit physical
address and a 4KB page size.
So p = 12, v = 32-12 = 20, and m = 30 - 12
= 18.
There are 2^m physical pages, which is 2^18
in our example.
There are 2^v virtual pages, which is 2^20
And since there is one entry in the page map
for each virtual page, there are 2^20 (approximately
one million) page map entries.
Each page map entry contains a PPN, an R bit
and a D bit, for a total of m+2 bits, which
is 20 bits in our example.
So there are approximately 20 million bits
in the page map.
If we were thinking of using a large special-purpose
static RAM to hold the page map, this would
get pretty expensive!
But why use a special-purpose memory for the
page map?
Why not use a portion of main memory, which
we have a lot of and have already bought and
paid for?
We could use a register, called the page map
pointer, to hold the address of the page map
array in main memory.
In other words, the page map would occupy
some number of dedicated physical pages.
Using the desired virtual page number as an
index, the hardware could perform the usual
array access calculation to fetch the needed
page map entry from main memory.
The downside of this proposed implementation
is that it now takes two accesses to physical
memory to perform one virtual access:
the first to retrieve the page table entry
needed for the virtual-to-physical address
translation, and the second to actually access
the requested location.
Once again, caches to the rescue.
Most systems incorporate a special-purpose
cache, called a translation look-aside buffer
(TLB), that maps virtual page numbers to physical
page numbers.
The TLB is usually small and quite fast.
It's usually fully-associative to ensure the
best possible hit ratio by avoiding collisions.
If the PPN is found by using the TLB, the
access to main memory for the page table entry
can be avoided, and we're back to a single
physical access for each virtual access.
The hit ratio of a TLB is quite high, usually
better than 99%.
This isn't too surprising since locality and
the notion of a working set suggest that only
a small number of pages are in active use
over short periods of time.
As we'll see in a few slides, there are interesting
variations to this simple TLB page-map-in-main-memory
architecture.
But the basic strategy will remain the same.
Putting it all together:
the virtual address generated by the CPU is
first processed by the TLB to see if the appropriate
translation from VPN to PPN has been cached.
If so, the main memory access can proceed
directly.
If the desired mapping is not in the TLB,
the appropriate entry in the page map is accessed
in main memory.
If the page is resident, the PPN field of
the page map entry is used to complete the
address translation.
And, of course, the translation is cached
in the TLB so that subsequent accesses to
this page can avoid the access to the page
map.
If the desired page is not resident, the MMU
triggers a page fault exception and the page
fault handler code will deal with the problem.
Here's a final example showing all the pieces
in action.
In this example, p = 10, v = 22, and m = 14.
How many pages can reside in physical memory
at one time?
There are 2^m physical pages, so 2^14.
How many entries are there in the page table?
There's one entry for each virtual page and
there are 2^v virtual pages, so there are
2^22 entries in the page table.
How many bits per entry in the page table?
Assume each entry holds the PPN, the resident
bit, and the dirty bit.
Since the PPN is m bits, there are m+2 bits
in each entry, so 16 bits.
How many pages does the page table occupy?
There are 2^v page table entries, each occupying
(m+2)/8 bytes, so the total size of the page
table in this example is 2^23 bytes.
Each page holds 2^p = 2^10 bytes, so the page
table occupies 2^23/2^10 = 2^13 pages.
What fraction of virtual memory can be resident
at any given time?
There are 2^v virtual pages, of which 2^m
can be resident.
So the fraction of resident pages
is 2^m/2^v = 2^14/2^22 = 1/2^8.
What is the physical address for virtual address
0x1804?
Which MMU components are involved in the translation?
First we have to decompose the virtual address
into VPN and offset.
The offset is the low-order 10 bits, so is
0x004 in this example.
The VPN is the remaining address bits, so
the VPN is 0x6.
Looking first in the TLB, we that the VPN-to-PPN
mapping for VPN 0x6 is cached,
so we can construct the physical address by
concatenating the PPN (0x2) with the 10-bit
offset (0x4) to get a physical address of
0x804.
You're right!
It's a bit of pain to do all the bit manipulations
when p is not a multiple of 4.
How about virtual address 0x1080?
For this address the VPN is 0x4 and the offset
is 0x80.
The translation for VPN 0x4 is not cached
in the TLB, so we have to check the page map,
which tells us that the page is resident in
physical page 5.
Concatenating the PPN and offset, we get 0x1480
as the physical address.
Finally, how about virtual address 0x0FC?
Here the VPN is 0 and the offset 0xFC.
The mapping for VPN 0 is not found in the
TLB and checking the page map reveals that
VPN 0 is not resident in main memory, so a
page fault exception is triggered.
There are a few things to note about the example
TLB and page map contents.
Note that a TLB entry can be invalid (it's
R bit is 0).
This can happen when a virtual page is replaced,
so when we change the R bit to 0 in the page
map, we have to do the same in the TLB.
And should we be concerned that PPN 0x5 appears
twice in the page table?
Note that the entry for VPN 0x3 doesn't matter
since it's R bit is 0.
Typically when marking a page not resident,
we don't bother to clear out the other fields
in the entry since they won't be used when
R=0.
So there's only one *valid* mapping to PPN
5.